The Albanian cuisine (Albanian: Kuzhina shqiptare) is the national cuisine of the Albanian people. It is Mediterranean, influenced by many including Italian and Turkish cooking.
Albanian cuisine is characterized by the use of spices such as black pepper and Mediterranean herbs such as oregano, mint, basil, rosemary and more in cooking meat and fish, but also chilli pepper and garlic.

Vegetables are used in almost every dish.
The main meal of the Albanians is lunch, which usually consists of gjell  (stew), the main dish of slowly cooked meat with various vegetables, and a salad of fresh vegetables, such as tomatoes, cucumbers, green peppers, and olives. The salad is dressed with salt, olive oil, vinegar or lemon juice.
In high elevation localities, smoked meat and pickled preserves are common. Animal organs are also used in dishes such as intestines and the head among other parts, which are considered a delicacy. Dairy products are integral part of the cuisine usually accompanied with ever present bread and alcoholic beverages such as Raki. Seafood specialties are also common in the coastal cities such as Durr s, Vlor , Shkod r, Lezh  and Sarand .




Wheat Bread (Buk  gruri) or corn bread (Buk  misri) are ever-present on the Albanian table. Hence the expression for "going to eat a meal" (Albanian: p r t  ngr n  buk ) can be literally translated as "going to eat bread." 'Bread' is also used in the authentic Albanian hospitality saying of "bread, salt, and heart" (Alb.: buk , krip  e zem r).
Chicken livers
Eggplant appetizers
Dolma
Stuffed Peppers (green peppers stuffed with rice, meat, other vegetables and herbs)
Pickled cabbage (Turshi lakre)
Fried sardines with lemon (sardele me Limon)
Albanian-style meze platters that include prosciutto ham, salami and feta cheese, accompanied with roasted bell peppers (capsicum) or green olives marinated in olive oil with garlic or onions.
Papare: bread leftovers cooked with water, egg, butter, and Gjize (salted curd cheese)




Albanian potato salad
Albanian tossed salad
Bean salad
Cabbage salad
Tomato and pepper salad




Bean Jahni soup
Potato and cabbage soup
Soup with lemon
Tarator
Trahana
Shqeto is soup from Lunxheri region of Gjirokaster




Oven-baked trout (or Ohrid trout) with onions and tomatoes
Baked whiting, carp, mullet or eel with olive oil and garlic




Tav  kosi, baked lamb and yogurt dish
veal or chicken with walnuts
F rges  of Tirana with veal (also see satara )
Fried meatballs or Qofte t  f rguara.
Proshute a dry-cured ham
Kolloface Kor e
Veal with very large lima beans
Harapash, polenta with the intestines of lamb, butter, cheese and corn flour
Pa e - common throughout the country and it is traditionally popular in Albania. Pa e is made with a sheep's, pig's or any cattle's head, boiled until meat comes off easily. It is then stewed with garlic, onion, black pepper, and vinegar. Sometimes a little flour is added to thicken the stew. It makes a hot and hearty winter stew.




Dolma (in Serbia known as Sarma and in South Eastern Montenegro known as Japrak)   a family of stuffed vegetable dishes
Baked leeks
F rges  of Tirana with peppers
Peppers stuffed with rice, meat and vegetables
Stuffed aubergines with cheese




Byrek   Albanian vegetable pie; it can also have feta cheese, spinach, cabbage, tomatoes, or meat; it's a layered pie made with filo pastry. Another version of the fillings is served as a filling for "pite" or "pita".
Kungullur   Pastry layers filled with mashed pumpkin, butter, salt or sugar
Bakllasar m   A traditional food prepared in Kosovo and Albania: it's layered pie also known as "pite" or "pita" (Byrek) without anything inside, which is covered with yogurt and garlic, and then heated again. It is eaten for lunch.
Flia   A traditional food prepared in Kosovo and Albania.
Qumeshtore
Pepeq
Shaprak
Qollopita
Lakruar is similar to burek however, it has layers of filo dough with onion, olive oil, eggs. It is specialty of South regions in Lunxheri




Patisseries are in every Albanian city. The most common desserts in Albania are made throughout the Balkans:
Halv 
Revani me sherbet
Hasude/Revani me niseshte
Tamb loriz
Sh ndetlie me mjalt 
Kabuni
Custard
Tollumba   fried dough pieces in syrup
Gliko and fruit jams
Pandispand
Dhiple
Bakllava
Sunxhuk Mjalte me ara
Karkanaqe
Llokume




Mineral water is one of the most preferred non-alcoholic drinks in Albania, along with carbonated beverages. Some of these are produced locally and some are imported.
Carbonated and mineral waters
Milk
Yogurt (Kos)
Mountain tea ( aj Mali)
Various fruit juices and soft drinks
Albanian buttermilk (Dhall )
Beer (local Birra Tirana, Birra Kor a and Birra Puka)
Boza
Raki
Cognac (local Konjak Sk nderbeu)
Albanian wine



Agriculture in Albania






LeBlanc, Tyler (26 December 2014). "Albania Mania: Perfect beaches, mountain hikes and truly local food. Packing yet?". Modern Farmer. 
Levene, David (1 January 2013). "Albania's chestnut, cheese and pasta workers.". The Guardian. 
Traditional Albanian Recipes